Hardware

Binary - I know this pretty well.


Computers are deterministic. The idea of determinism is critical to seeing computers as something that can be tamed, controlled and understood. 

Machine code is binary code computers understand and execute directly.
Assembly is human readable machine language representation.

History of Computers
Started with the abacus back in the middle east in 1500s as a simple calculator, later developed into a mechanical device that could add and subtract. Then Gottfried Leibniz came up with the idea to use a stepped drum and allowed the mechanical calculator to multiply, divide, and find square roots. Leibniz also invented the binary number system. This was used by George Boole to invent Boolean algebra. 
(1800s)Charles Babbage was the next to pioneer computers, he tried to build a large machine consisting of an input, memory, processor, and an output. However he failed to get enough funding as this was a large scale project. Years later Herman Hollerith (late 1800s) built one of the first calculating machines (that worked) and called it a tabulator. It was a great success for tallying numbers and analysis of data, so much so he created Tabulating Machine Company. This later became known as Computer Tabulating Recording, and a few decades later became International Business Machines (IBM)(around 1930s).
However in the early 1900s it was Vannevar Bush that developed a series of conraptions which were built of many gears, belts, levers, and shafts to carry out calcuations in a physical way. These machines were known as analog computers because they stored numbers in a physical form rather than as digits. Complex operations often took days to complete. Bush also played important roles in overseeing the atomic bomb, made the draft of what inspired the world wide web, and influenced many other mathematicians. Another important figure in early 1900s was Claude Shannon who figured out how electrical circuits could be linked together to process binary code with Boolean algebra. 
Alan Turing was a mathematician who contributed to the theory of how computers processed information. He theorised the Turing machine which could work through a series of instructions, reading data, writing results, and then moving to next instruction. He also played a role in the creation of Automatic Computing Engine (ACE), Colossus, and Manchester/Ferranti Mark I.
Konrad Zuse constructed the Z1, the worlds first programmable binary computer in 1938. The next year John Atanasoff and Clifford Berry buit the Atanasoff Berry Computer (ABC). These machines were among the first to use electrical switches to store numbers; 0 meant the switch was off, and 1 meant it was on. Combining hundreds of switches they could store many binary digits. The first large scale digital computer appeared in 1944 built by Howard Aiken. It was a very large machine using electromagneitc relays to store and processs numbers. 
Colossus was the first fully electronic computer, and used vacuum tubes (known as valves in England). These tubes were first used for radio receivers to amplify weak signals. However Colossus was only used for cracking military codes, and therefore the ENIAC (Electronic NUmberical Integrator and Calculator) is considered the first fully electronic, general purpose, digital computer. This was created by J. Presper Eckert and John Mauchly, who later formed the Eckert Mauchly Computer Corporation. This company worked with John von Neumann and together they designed Electronic Discrete Variable Automatic Computer (EDVAC). Neumann helped define how the machine stored and processed its programs, laying the foundation for how computers operate. Later the company worked with Grace Murray Hopper who came up with the idea for programming languages instead of machine code for humans. Due to the size and cost of using relays and tubes, Bell labs developed the point contact transistor. Later one of the team came up with the idea of the junction transistor (the basis of most transistors since). These transistors were used as amplifiers or switches, were significantly smaller than tubes, and used very little power. A couple years later Robert Noyce came up with the idea of an integrated circuit which connected many transistors together and made it easier to connect a large quantity of them for computers.
Computers were later started to be developed for personal use by Apple and IBM, but it was Gary Kildall who came up with the idea of an operating system called CP/M that acted as an intermediary between the users programs and the machines hardware. Thus any computer hardware would be able to run identical user programs. Then IBM hired Bill Gates, who developed an OS known as DOS with his small company Microsoft.
The first GUI appeared, in the Xerox Alto computer,which was conceived by Alan Kay.

